First model testing lesson draft. (#24967)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: ruby_on_rails/testing/model_testing.md

~~~

RSpec.configure do |config|
  config.include FactoryBot::Syntax::Methods
end

~~~

Make sure to require this file in `rails_helper.rb`. While you can require the file by adding `require support/factory_bot` to the top of the file. Rails also provides this in the commented out line `Dir[Rails.root.join("spec/support/**/*.rb")].each { |f| require f }` which enables you to load all of the support files when booting up. This is useful for not having to manually add all of the support files and avoids issues if you forget to add a file for example. 

The last thing you might be wondering is how the test database clears itself in between it's tests. Rail's does this automatically for you, however if Rail's is not doing it for you make sure your following the instructions in the rails_helper.rb file and make sure to ask in the [Discord](https://discord.com/channels/505093832157691914/690591236922409012) first! If you are interested, you can learn more about database cleaning in the additional resources.

## Creating a factory

> Below is an example of a user factory. Notice that the factory will be a User class based off of the name of your factory. You can also define as many attributes as you want and it can be useful to focus on adding only the attributes your testing and adding them as need be.

Reviewer: "the attributes your testing" should probably be "the attributes you are testing"

## Setting the test

The first tool that we are going to use to set up the data is [factory bot](https://github.com/thoughtbot/factory_bot). Factory bot is a gem that you can use to set up test data and create necessary data for your tests. Adding Factory bot is similar to adding other testing gems. Add the following line to the to the following section in your Gemfile.

~~~

group :development, :test do

  gem "factory_bot_rails"  #Add this line.

end

~~~

Then in your terminal enter `bundle install` to the terminal where it will install the gem. Now we need to move into setting up our test configuration to utilize Factory bot. First were going to navigate to `spec/support/factory_bot.rb` and add the following configuration. 

~~~

RSpec.configure do |config|
  config.include FactoryBot::Syntax::Methods
end

~~~

> Make sure to require this file in `rails_helper.rb`. We will briefly cover what a factory will look like and some things to keep in mind when creating your data. While you can require the file by adding `require support/factory_bot` to the top of the file. Rails also provides this in the commented out line `Dir[Rails.root.join("spec/support/**/*.rb")].each { |f| require f }` which enables you to load all of the support files when booting up. This is useful for not having to manually add all of the support files and avoids issues if you forget to add a file for example. 

Reviewer: "We will briefly cover what a factory will look like and some things to keep in mind when creating your data." is out of place in this paragraph. Maybe move it to the first paragraph under the "Setting the test" heading, between the 3rd and 4th paragraph.

Author: After moving it It definitely felt a bit awkward so i just deleted the line since it was a bit redundant for the beginning.

> The last thing you might be wondering is how the test database clears itself in between it's tests. Rail's does this automatically for you, however if Rail's is not doing it for you make sure your following the instructions in the rails_helper.rb file and make sure to ask in the [Discord](https://discord.com/channels/505093832157691914/690591236922409012) first! There is also a alternative option in the additional resources section if need be for database cleaning.

Reviewer: The last paragraph reads somewhat awkward to me, but I can't put my finger on it. Maybe something like "If you are interested, you can learn more about database cleaning in the additional resources."

~~~

# This will guess the User class
FactoryBot.define do
  factory :user do
    first_name { "John" }
    last_name  { "Doe" }
    admin { false }
  end
end

~~~

When creating a factory bot record you have the choice of using the `create(:user)` which returns a saved instance of the object from your database or `build(:user)` which returns an unsaved instance of an object. 

## Example model test

In the following example one of the things we often see when users sign up is that sites will ask for an email to send a user notifications for example. RSpec can help you test this by utilizing model tests. Let's take a look at what a requiring a user email would look like in a model and the corresponding tests. 

~~~

class EmailValidator < ActiveModel::EachValidator
  def validate_each(record, attribute, value)
    unless value =~ /\A([^@\s]+)@((?:[-a-z0-9]+\.)+[a-z]{2,})\z/i
      record.errors.add attribute, (options[:message] || "is not an email")
    end
  end
end

class User < ApplicationRecord
  validates :email, presence: true, email: true
end

~~~
 

> In the above code we add our own validator to the email validation. [Validate each](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_validations.html#custom-validators). By using validate the model will call on the validator to ensure the presence of valid characters. That then brings us to the following RSpec test where we will write the context and what we expect the outcome to be. The validate_each method is also where you would make changes as well if the test failed to pass.

Reviewer: Really love this idea! However, the test is truly just testing to see if the email address was provided, so I do not think we need to add the `EmailValidator` logic to this testing lesson. Though this would be great information in a lesson!  I feel that it is distracting from the main purpose of this lesson. I was imagining just a test for the `validates :email, presence: true` portion of the `User` model.

If you feel strongly about the need for testing an email also means that we need to test that it is a valid email address, then I suggest that we skip this idea and go with an easier validation for `validates : first_name, presence: true`

~~~

RSpec.describe User, type: :model do
  describe '#valid?' do
    context "when the user does not have an email address" do
      user =  build(:user)

      it "will not be valid" do
        expect(user.valid?).to be false
      end
    end
    
    context "when the user has an email address" do
      user =  build(:user, email_address: "jdoe@example.com")

      it "will be valid" do
        expect(user.valid?).to be true 
      end
    end
  end
end

~~~ 

> One thing to note is that we have two tests. We want to test both that it only accepts valid characters while having a separate test for rejecting the invalid ones. The other thing to note is that you can set attributes when creating a factory record as well rather than going back to the factory file. The Factory bot [repository](https://github.com/thoughtbot/factory_bot/blob/main/GETTING_STARTED.md#setup) has excellent information for diving in deeper and it's highly reccomended to read through it to understand factory bot better. 

Reviewer: reccomended is misspelled -> recommended

### Knowledge Check

This section contains questions for you to check your understanding of this lesson on your own. If you’re having trouble answering a question, click it and review the material it links to.

*   <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#what-are-model-tests">What are model tests?</a>
*   <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#creating-a-factory">How would I create a factory to use in my tests?</a>
*   <a class="knowledge-check-link" href="#example-model-test">What are some examples of testing business logic?</a>

### Additional Resources

This section contains helpful links to related content. It isn’t required, so consider it supplemental.

*   For an example of a model test and having a useful resource. You can visit [code with Jason](https://www.codewithjason.com/write-model-tests-part/).

> *   For an alternative if RSpecs built in database cleaner isn't working for testing. You can find it [here](https://github.com/DatabaseCleaner/database_cleaner).

Reviewer: I prefer an article that explains more about the need for database cleaner, then just providing a link to the gem. I liked this article, but I am sure there are others: https://thoughtbot.com/blog/how-we-test-rails-applications#database-cleaner. 

If you disagree, let me know why you prefer this approach.

Author: I really like this article. It has some solid links in the section plus it was updated last year so fairly relevant vs a 10 year old article.

### Introduction

The last lesson covered unit testing and now we will move into model testing. Here you will get an idea of how to test within Rails for model testing as well as a deeper dive of how to structure these tests.

### Lesson Overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

*   What are model tests?
*   How do I run a model test?
*   How to structure model testing?

## What are model tests?

A model test is a unit test in the context of Ruby on Rails. Model tests in this case are designed to test the business logic of your models. Let's say you need to test a custom validation method for your blog post. In this case you would need to reach into the model aspect of your testing skillset. Before you write the RSpec there will be a few tools you will need to familiarize yourself with.

## Setting the test

> The first tool that we are going to use to set up the data is factory bot. Factory bot is a gem that you can use to set up test data and create necessary data for your tests. Adding Factory bot is similar to adding other testing gems. Add the following line to the to the following section in your Gemfile.

Reviewer: I think it would be useful to add a link to Factory Bot, so that people can easily read more about it.
https://github.com/thoughtbot/factory_bot

~~~

group :development, :test do

  gem "factory_bot_rails"  #Add this line.

end

~~~

Then in your terminal enter `bundle install` to the terminal where it will install the gem. Now we need to move into setting up our test configuration to utilize Factory bot. First were going to navigate to `spec/support/factory_bot.rb` and add the following configuration. 

~~~

RSpec.configure do |config|
  config.include FactoryBot::Syntax::Methods
end

~~~

> Make sure to require this file in `rails_helper.rb`. We will briefly cover what a factory will look like and some things to keep in mind when creating your data. 

Reviewer: I think it could be very useful to indicate how to require this file in rails_helper.rb. I am not sure where/how I adopted this, but I believe this is a very common way to make sure to load all support files:
`Dir[Rails.root.join("spec/support/**/*.rb")].each { |f| require f }`

      Rails.application.load_seed
    end
  
    config.before(:each) do
      DatabaseCleaner.strategy = :transaction
    end
  
    config.before(:each, :js => true) do
      DatabaseCleaner.strategy = :truncation
    end
  
    config.before(:each) do
      DatabaseCleaner.start
    end
  
    config.after(:each) do
      DatabaseCleaner.clean
    end
  end

~~~

  Now your finally done configuring your tests and can set up your first one!

## Example model test

When testing our models we usually want to focus on testing the business logic. Essentially what goes on behind each model that enables the user experience to work correctly. This could mean ensuring promotion tickets prices are correct, only correct form data is accepted, custom user verification etc. In the context of a user it would like like the following. It's important to note that each model should have it's own file in the `spec/models` file. This is helpful for keeping your model tests organized and readable.

~~~

RSpec.describe User, type: :model do
  it "verifies the user has a number."
    user = build(:user, user_name: "Forbidden username!") 
    expect(user.save). to eql(false)
  end
end

> ~~~

Reviewer: I am not sure if this test is very clear. Maybe the explanation needs to come first, but I can't tell if we are testing if the name is valid, or if the user has a number.

I also think it could be useful here to build out 2-3 tests here, using contexts to show different examples of it being true and false.

## Setting the test

The first tool that we are going to use to set up the data is [factory bot](https://github.com/thoughtbot/factory_bot). Factory bot is a gem that you can use to set up test data and create necessary data for your tests. Adding Factory bot is similar to adding other testing gems. Add the following line to the to the following section in your Gemfile.

~~~

group :development, :test do

  gem "factory_bot_rails"  #Add this line.

end

~~~

Then in your terminal enter `bundle install` to the terminal where it will install the gem. Now we need to move into setting up our test configuration to utilize Factory bot. First were going to navigate to `spec/support/factory_bot.rb` and add the following configuration. 

~~~

RSpec.configure do |config|
  config.include FactoryBot::Syntax::Methods
end

~~~

> Make sure to require this file in `rails_helper.rb`. We will briefly cover what a factory will look like and some things to keep in mind when creating your data. While you can require the file by adding `require support/factory_bot` to the top of the file. Rails also provides this in the commented out line `Dir[Rails.root.join("spec/support/**/*.rb")].each { |f| require f }` which enables you to load all of the support files when booting up. This is useful for not having to manually add all of the support files and avoids issues if you forget to add a file for example. The last thing you might be wondering is how the test database clears itself in between it's tests. Rail's does this automatically for you, however if Rail's is not doing it for you make sure your following the instructions in the rails_helper.rb file and make sure to ask in the [Discord](https://discord.com/channels/505093832157691914/690591236922409012)! There is also a alternative option in the additional resources section if need be for database cleaning.

Reviewer: I believe this paragraph has two different subjects, so it needs to be broken into different paragraphs. In addition, since we are keeping database cleaner in the lesson, I think I found a great resource that bridges the gap. Though I am open to other suggestions on this. 

```suggestion
You will need to require this file in `rails_helper.rb`. While you can require the file by adding `require support/factory_bot` to the top of the file. Rails also provides this in the commented out line `Dir[Rails.root.join("spec/support/**/*.rb")].each { |f| require f }` which enables you to load all of the support files when booting up. This is useful for not having to manually add all of the support files and avoids issues if you forget to add a file for example. 

Since Factory bot creates data in the test database, you might be wondering if we need to clear the database between tests. In a lot of cases, Rails will automatically do this for you. However, as you develop more complex applications, you might run into situations where data is not being cleared. If you would like to learn more about these situations, the creator of Factory bot has a [great article about using a Database Cleaner](https://thoughtbot.com/blog/how-we-test-rails-applications#database-cleaner). If you run into any issues with this, be sure to ask in our [Discord](https://discord.com/channels/505093832157691914/690591236922409012)!
```

## Creating a factory

Below is an example of a user factory. Notice that the factory will be a User class based off of the name of your factory. You can also define as many attributes as you want and it can be useful to focus on adding only the attributes your testing and adding them as need be.

~~~

# This will guess the User class
FactoryBot.define do
  factory :user do
    first_name { "John" }
    last_name  { "Doe" }
    admin { false }
  end
end

~~~

> When creating a factory bot record you have the choice of using the `create(:user)` which returns a saved instance of the object from your database or `build(:user)` which returns an unsaved instance of an object. You might be wondering how we avoid objects hanging around in the database. Thankfully RSpec includes the ability to clear the database in between tests. However if you do find that RSpec's database clearing isn't fitting your needs here you can check the additional resources for alternatives.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to keep mentioning cleaning up the database. I believe it is detracting from the lesson content.

## Example model test

When testing our models we usually want to focus on testing the business logic. Essentially what goes on behind each model that enables the user experience to work correctly. This could mean ensuring promotion tickets prices are correct, only correct form data is accepted, custom user verification etc. Below are a few examples along with an explanation to explain it more in depth. It's important to note that each model should have it's own file in the `spec/models` file. This is helpful for keeping your model tests organized and readable.

This is the failing example where we expect the pass to not pass.

~~~

#first we would want to check our spec/factories file.
#To make sure it's set up properly.
#It should look like the following.

FactoryBot.define do

  factory :user do 
    user_name { "userwithout a number" }
  end 

end

RSpec.describe User, type: :model do
  #define test expectations
  it "verifies the user has a number."
  #We then build a user.
    user = build(:user) 
    #Then we check for the expected outcome.
    expect(user.save). to eql(false)
  end

> end

Reviewer: I don't think we need to create another Factory example here. I believe this should build on the example earlier in the lesson. I am also still lost on testing a user that has a number in the user_name. I'd prefer to test a simple validation that people can easily follow.

I believe these example tests are missing contexts. https://www.betterspecs.org/#contexts

I think context will change up the comments about defining the test expectations & then building user.  Not that we have to use this pattern, but what I find to be helpful is to state the context, build models in that context, state the expected result, then test the expectation. So it would be something like this:

```
RSpec.describe User, type: :model do
  describe '#valid?' do
    context "when the user does not have an email address" do
      user =  build(:user)

      it "will not be valid" do
        expect(user.valid?).to be false
      end
    end
    
    context "when the user has an email address" do
      user =  build(:user, email_address: "jdoe@example.com")

      it "will be valid" do
        expect(user.valid?).to be true
      end
    end
  end
end
```

Reviewer: Maybe we should include the code that is requiring the number in the username, requiring a email address, or other validation. This might be the missing piece that makes it hard for me to follow along with the example.

Author: @rlmoser99 if i'm understanding correctly. For example, a password that requires a special character. Showing the code in the app where that's required, followed by the model code itself, and then the test code itself as the final step. Something like this was what you had in mind?

Reviewer: Yes, something like that. I don't think we needs to show the entire model, just the line that the test will be testing. And using the same Factory that we created earlier in the lesson.
